[#11521] docs(glue): Add AWS Glue catalog and connector documentation (#11523)
apache/gravitino: docs/trino-connector/catalog-glue.md

---
title: "Apache Gravitino Trino connector - Glue catalog"
slug: /trino-connector/catalog-glue
keyword: gravitino connector trino glue aws
license: "This software is licensed under the Apache License version 2."
---

The Glue catalog allows Trino to query data stored in tables registered in the AWS Glue Data Catalog.

> It supports both Hive-format and Iceberg-format tables on Amazon S3.

Reviewer: **[style]** This body prose appears before the first H2 heading, creating orphan content (STYLE.md: "Every doc page opens with an H2 heading after the frontmatter"). Add an `## Introduction` (or `## Overview`) heading above this paragraph and move it underneath.

> It supports both Hive-format and Iceberg-format tables on Amazon S3.

Reviewer: **[style]** This body prose appears before the first H2 heading, creating orphan content (STYLE.md: "Every doc page opens with an H2 heading after the frontmatter"). Add an `## Introduction` (or `## Overview`) heading above this paragraph and move it underneath.

> It supports both Hive-format and Iceberg-format tables on Amazon S3.

Reviewer: **[style]** This body prose appears before the first H2 heading, creating orphan content (STYLE.md: "Every doc page opens with an H2 heading after the frontmatter"). Add an `## Introduction` (or `## Overview`) heading above this paragraph and move it underneath.

> It supports both Hive-format and Iceberg-format tables on Amazon S3.

Reviewer: **[style]** This body prose appears before the first H2 heading, creating orphan content. Add an `## Introduction` (or `## Overview`) heading above this paragraph and move it underneath.

## Requirements

- Network access from the Trino coordinator and workers to the AWS Glue API and Amazon S3.
- An AWS IAM credential (access key pair or instance profile) with the necessary Glue and S3 permissions.
  See [AWS IAM permissions](../aws-glue-catalog.md#aws-iam-permissions) for the required policy.
- Data files stored on Amazon S3.

> ## Schema operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` → `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Schema Operations
```

> ## Schema operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` → `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Schema Operations
```

> ## Schema operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` → `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Schema Operations
```

> ## Schema operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` -> `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Schema Operations
```

> ### Create a schema

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` → `Schema`.

```suggestion
### Create a Schema
```

> ### Create a schema

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` → `Schema`.

```suggestion
### Create a Schema
```

> ### Create a schema

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` → `Schema`.

```suggestion
### Create a Schema
```

> ### Create a schema

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` -> `Schema`.

```suggestion
### Create a Schema
```

```sql
CREATE SCHEMA glue_test.schema_name;
```

> ## Table operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` → `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Table Operations
```

> ## Table operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` → `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Table Operations
```

> ## Table operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` → `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Table Operations
```

> ## Table operations

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `operations` -> `Operations`.

```suggestion
## Table Operations
```

> ### Create a Hive-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create a Hive-Format Table
```

> ### Create a Hive-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create a Hive-Format Table
```

> ### Create a Hive-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create a Hive-Format Table
```

> ### Create a Hive-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` -> `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create a Hive-Format Table
```

The default table format is Hive. The following example creates an ORC-format partitioned table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE glue_test.db01.orders
(
  order_id  bigint,
  customer  varchar,
  amount    decimal(10, 2),
  order_dt  date
)
WITH (
  format       = 'ORC',
  location     = 's3://my-bucket/warehouse/db01/orders',
  partitioned_by = ARRAY['order_dt']
);
```

To create a bucketed, sorted table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE glue_test.db01.events
(
  event_id bigint,
  user_id  bigint,
  ts       timestamp
)
WITH (
  format       = 'PARQUET',
  location     = 's3://my-bucket/warehouse/db01/events',
  bucketed_by  = ARRAY['user_id'],
  bucket_count = 8,
  sorted_by    = ARRAY['ts DESC']
);
```

> ### Create an Iceberg-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create an Iceberg-Format Table
```

> ### Create an Iceberg-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create an Iceberg-Format Table
```

> ### Create an Iceberg-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create an Iceberg-Format Table
```

> ### Create an Iceberg-format table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` -> `Table`.

```suggestion
### Create an Iceberg-Format Table
```

Set `type = 'ICEBERG'` to create an Iceberg table. Iceberg tables support richer partition transforms.

```sql
CREATE TABLE glue_test.db01.logs
(
  log_id   bigint,
  message  varchar,
  event_ts timestamp(6) with time zone
)
WITH (
  type         = 'ICEBERG',
  location     = 's3://my-bucket/warehouse/db01/logs',
  partitioned_by = ARRAY['hour(event_ts)']
);
```

Supported Iceberg partition transform expressions in `partitioned_by`:

| Expression          | Description              |
|---------------------|--------------------------|
| `column`            | Identity partition       |
| `year(column)`      | Partition by year        |
| `month(column)`     | Partition by month       |
| `day(column)`       | Partition by day         |
| `hour(column)`      | Partition by hour        |
| `bucket(column, N)` | Hash into N buckets      |
| `truncate(column, W)` | Truncate to width W    |

:::note
`CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE AS SELECT` is not supported. Use `DROP TABLE` followed by `CREATE TABLE AS SELECT` as an alternative.
:::

> ### Alter table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Alter Table
```

> ### Alter table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Alter Table
```

> ### Alter table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` → `Table`.

```suggestion
### Alter Table
```

> ### Alter table

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` -> `Table`.

```suggestion
### Alter Table
```

The following alter table operations are supported:

- Add a column
- Drop a column
- Rename a column
- Change a column type
- Set a table property

:::caution
Hive-format table rename is not supported. AWS Glue does not provide a native rename API for tables.
Iceberg-format table rename is supported.
:::

### Select

```sql
SELECT * FROM glue_test.db01.orders WHERE order_dt = DATE '2024-01-01';
```

### Insert

```sql
INSERT INTO glue_test.db01.orders (order_id, customer, amount, order_dt)
VALUES (1, 'alice', 99.99, DATE '2024-01-01');
```

### Update

`UPDATE` is supported only for Iceberg tables (v2 spec or higher).

```sql
UPDATE glue_test.db01.logs SET message = 'updated' WHERE log_id = 1;
```

### Delete

For Hive-format tables, `DELETE` is only supported when the `WHERE` clause matches entire partitions.
For Iceberg tables, row-level deletion is supported.

```sql
-- Hive table: delete an entire partition
DELETE FROM glue_test.db01.orders WHERE order_dt = DATE '2024-01-01';

-- Iceberg table: row-level delete
DELETE FROM glue_test.db01.logs WHERE log_id = 42;
```

### Drop

```sql
DROP TABLE glue_test.db01.orders;

DROP SCHEMA glue_test.db01;
```

> ## Schema and table properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Schema and Table Properties
```

> ## Schema and table properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Schema and Table Properties
```

> ## Schema and table properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Schema and Table Properties
```

> ## Schema and table properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Schema and Table Properties
```

> ### Create a schema with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` and `properties` must be capitalized. (`with` stays lowercase as a short preposition.)

```suggestion
### Create a Schema with Properties
```

> ### Create a schema with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` and `properties` must be capitalized. (`with` stays lowercase as a short preposition.)

```suggestion
### Create a Schema with Properties
```

> ### Create a schema with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` and `properties` must be capitalized. (`with` stays lowercase as a short preposition.)

```suggestion
### Create a Schema with Properties
```

> ### Create a schema with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `schema` and `properties` must be capitalized. (`with` stays lowercase as a short preposition.)

```suggestion
### Create a Schema with Properties
```

```sql
CREATE SCHEMA glue_test.db01
WITH (
  location = 's3://my-bucket/warehouse/db01'
);
```

| Property   | Description              | Default Value | Required | Since Version |
|------------|--------------------------|---------------|----------|---------------|
| `location` | S3 location for the schema | (none)      | No       | 1.3.0         |

> ### Create a table with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Create a Table with Properties
```

> ### Create a table with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Create a Table with Properties
```

> ### Create a table with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Create a Table with Properties
```

> ### Create a table with properties

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `table` and `properties` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Create a Table with Properties
```

|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------|---------------|
| `type`          | Table format: `HIVE` or `ICEBERG`                                           | `HIVE`        | No       | 1.3.0         |
| `format`        | File format for Hive-format tables: `PARQUET`, `ORC`, `TEXTFILE`, etc.      | `TEXTFILE`    | No       | 1.3.0         |
| `location`      | S3 storage location for the table                                           | (derived from catalog `warehouse`) | No | 1.3.0 |
| `partitioned_by`| Partition columns or expressions. For Iceberg, use transform syntax such as `year(col)`. | (none) | No | 1.3.0 |
| `bucketed_by`   | Bucket columns (Hive-format tables only)                                    | (none)        | No       | 1.3.0         |
| `bucket_count`  | Number of buckets (required when `bucketed_by` is set)                      | (none)        | No       | 1.3.0         |
| `sorted_by`     | Sort order columns, e.g. `ARRAY['col ASC NULLS LAST', 'col2 DESC']`        | (none)        | No       | 1.3.0         |

> ## Basic usage examples

Reviewer: **[style]** STYLE.md: "'Examples' not 'Usage Examples': drop the redundant 'Usage' qualifier." Drop `Basic` as an additional redundant qualifier.

```suggestion
## Examples
```

> ## Basic usage examples

Reviewer: **[style]** STYLE.md: "'Examples' not 'Usage Examples': drop the redundant 'Usage' qualifier." Drop `Basic` as an additional redundant qualifier.

```suggestion
## Examples
```

> ## Basic usage examples

Reviewer: **[style]** STYLE.md: "'Examples' not 'Usage Examples': drop the redundant 'Usage' qualifier." Drop `Basic` as an additional redundant qualifier.

```suggestion
## Examples
```

> ## Basic usage examples

Reviewer: **[style]** Drop redundant qualifiers `Basic` and `Usage`.

```suggestion
## Examples
```

> The following steps show how to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.

Reviewer: **[style]** `show how to use` is weak framing. Use a direct imperative per engineering voice guidelines.

```suggestion
Follow these steps to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.
```

> The following steps show how to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.

Reviewer: **[style]** `show how to use` is weak framing. Use a direct imperative per engineering voice guidelines.

```suggestion
Follow these steps to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.
```

> The following steps show how to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.

Reviewer: **[style]** `show how to use` is weak framing. Use a direct imperative per engineering voice guidelines.

```suggestion
Follow these steps to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.
```

> The following steps show how to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.

Reviewer: **[style]** `show how to use` is weak framing. Use a direct imperative.

```suggestion
Follow these steps to use the Glue catalog in Trino through Gravitino.
```

> ### Create a catalog in Gravitino

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `catalog` → `Catalog`. (`in` stays lowercase.)

```suggestion
### Create a Catalog in Gravitino
```

> ### Create a catalog in Gravitino

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `catalog` → `Catalog`. (`in` stays lowercase.)

```suggestion
### Create a Catalog in Gravitino
```

> ### Create a catalog in Gravitino

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `catalog` → `Catalog`. (`in` stays lowercase.)

```suggestion
### Create a Catalog in Gravitino
```

> ### Create a catalog in Gravitino

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `catalog` -> `Catalog`. (`in` stays lowercase.)

```suggestion
### Create a Catalog in Gravitino
```

Use the Trino CLI to create the catalog. Assuming the metalake is `test` and the catalog name is `glue_test`:

```sql
CALL gravitino.system.create_catalog(
  'glue_test',
  'glue',
  MAP(
    ARRAY['aws-region', 'aws-access-key-id', 'aws-secret-access-key', 'warehouse'],
    ARRAY['us-east-1', '<aws-access-key-id>', '<aws-secret-access-key>', 's3://my-bucket/warehouse']
  )
);
```

For more information about the Glue catalog, refer to [AWS Glue catalog](../aws-glue-catalog.md).

> ### Connect and list catalogs

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `list` and `catalogs` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Connect and List Catalogs
```

> ### Connect and list catalogs

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `list` and `catalogs` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Connect and List Catalogs
```

> ### Connect and list catalogs

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `list` and `catalogs` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Connect and List Catalogs
```

> ### Connect and list catalogs

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `list` and `catalogs` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
### Connect and List Catalogs
```

Set `gravitino.metalake` to `test` and start the Trino container. Then list catalogs:

```sql
SHOW CATALOGS;
```

The results are similar to:

```text
    Catalog
----------------
 gravitino
 glue_test
 jmx
 system
(4 rows)
```

The `glue_test` catalog corresponds to the catalog created in Gravitino.

> ## Data type mapping

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `type` and `mapping` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Data Type Mapping
```

> ## Data type mapping

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `type` and `mapping` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Data Type Mapping
```

> ## Data type mapping

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `type` and `mapping` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Data Type Mapping
```

> ## Data type mapping

Reviewer: **[style]** Title Case: `type` and `mapping` must be capitalized.

```suggestion
## Data Type Mapping
```

| `binary`                     | `VARBINARY`                  |                                              |
| `date`                       | `DATE`                       |                                              |
| `time(6)`                    | `TIME(6)`                    | Iceberg tables only; microsecond precision   |
| `timestamp`                  | `TIMESTAMP(3)`               | Hive-format tables; millisecond precision    |
| `timestamp(6)`               | `TIMESTAMP(6)`               | Iceberg tables; microsecond precision        |
| `timestamptz(6)`             | `TIMESTAMP(6) WITH TIME ZONE`| Iceberg tables only                          |
| `list`                       | `ARRAY`                      |                                              |
| `map`                        | `MAP`                        |                                              |
| `struct`                     | `ROW`                        |                                              |

:::note
`TIME` and `TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE` are available for Iceberg-format tables only. Hive-format tables use millisecond-precision `TIMESTAMP` without time zone.
:::

> ## Passing Trino connector configuration

Reviewer: **[style]** Gerund-led headings are forbidden. Drop `Passing` and use a noun phrase.

```suggestion
## Trino Connector Configuration
```

> ## Passing Trino connector configuration

Reviewer: **[style]** Gerund-led headings are forbidden. Drop `Passing` and use a noun phrase.

```suggestion
## Trino Connector Configuration
```

> ## Passing Trino connector configuration

Reviewer: **[style]** Gerund-led headings are forbidden. Drop `Passing` and use a noun phrase.

```suggestion
## Trino Connector Configuration
```

> ## Passing Trino connector configuration

Reviewer: **[style]** Gerund-led headings are forbidden. Drop `Passing` and use a noun phrase.

```suggestion
## Trino Connector Configuration
```

> Gravitino passes catalog properties to the underlying Trino Hive connector. You can supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:

Reviewer: **[style]** Drop `You can` scaffolding; use the imperative.

```suggestion
Supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:
```

> Gravitino passes catalog properties to the underlying Trino Hive connector. You can supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:

Reviewer: **[style]** Drop `You can` scaffolding; use the imperative.

```suggestion
Supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:
```

> Gravitino passes catalog properties to the underlying Trino Hive connector. You can supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:

Reviewer: **[style]** Drop `You can` scaffolding; use the imperative.

```suggestion
Supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:
```

> Gravitino passes catalog properties to the underlying Trino Hive connector. You can supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:

Reviewer: **[style]** Drop `You can` scaffolding; use the imperative.

```suggestion
Supply additional Trino connector properties using the `trino.bypass.` prefix:
```
